

**Assembler**: A computer will not understand any program written in a language, other than its machine language. The programs written in other languages must be translated into the machine language. Such translation is performed with the help of software. A program which translates an assembly language program into a machine language program is called an assembler. If an assembler which runs on a computer and produces the machine codes for the same computer then it is called self assembler or resident assembler. If an assembler that runs on a computer and produces the machine codes for other computer then it is called Cross Assembler.<br>
Assemblers are further divided into two types: One Pass Assembler and Two Pass Assembler. One pass assembler is the assembler which assigns the memory addresses to the variables and translates the source code into machine code in the first pass simultaneously. A Two Pass Assembler is the assembler which reads the source code twice. In the first pass, it reads all the variables and assigns them memory addresses. In the second pass, it reads the source code and translates the code into object code.<br><br>
**Compiler**: It is a program which translates a high level language program into a machine language program. A compiler is more intelligent than an assembler. It checks all kinds of limits, ranges, errors etc. But its program run time is more and occupies a larger part of the memory. It has slow speed. Because a compiler goes through the entire program and then translates the entire program into machine codes. If a compiler runs on a computer and produces the machine codes for the same computer then it is known as a self compiler or resident compiler. On the other hand, if a compiler runs on a computer and produces the machine codes for other computer then it is known as a cross compiler.<br><br>
**Interpreter**: An interpreter is a program which translates statements of a program into machine code. It translates only one statement of the program at a time. It reads only one statement of program, translates it and executes it. Then it reads the next statement of the program again translates it and executes it. In this way it proceeds further till all the statements are translated and executed. On the other hand, a compiler goes through the entire program and then translates the entire program into machine codes. A compiler is 5 to 25 times faster than an interpreter.<br>
By the compiler, the machine codes are saved permanently for future reference. On the other hand, the machine codes produced by interpreter are not saved. An interpreter is a small program as compared to compiler. It occupies less memory space, so it can be used in a smaller system which has limited memory space.


Java - Compiled or interpreted
---

When you run javac HelloWorld.java java compiler is invoked which converts human readable code(Contents of .java file) to java byte codes(intermediate form). This bytecodes are stored in a special file(called Class file) with .class extension.<br><br>
Finally when you run java HelloWorld java interpreter is invoked which reads these bytecodes line by line, convert it into machine language and execute it.
This is why Java is called as both compiled as well as interpreted language. But this is not all. There is another concept called - Just-in-time compilation.
